# Data Engineering
## Project: Data Modelling with Postgres

## Project Overview
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

### Install

This project requires **Python 3.x** and the following Python libraries installed:

- psycopg2

### Code

This project contains four files:

- `dwh.cfg`: Configuration file.
- `sql_queries.py`: Define SQL statements, which will be imported into the two files below.
- `create_tables.py`: Create fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.
- `etl.py`: Load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into analytics tables on Redshift.

### Run
1. Create database in Postgres by running following command:
```bash
python3 create_tables.py
```  
2. Load data from file system into Postgres.
```bash
python3 etl.py
```  

### Data
Dataset for this project is publicly available on AWS S3: 
- Song Data: data/song_data
- Log Data: data/log_data

1. **Song Dataset**: Dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.
   - `File Count: 385253` / `Total Size: 803 MB`

2. **Log Dataset**: Dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings. Log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. 
   - `File Count: 31` / `Total Size: 4 MB`

### Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table
1. **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
   - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables
2. **users** - users in the app
   - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
3. **songs** - songs in music database
   - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
4. **artists** - artists in music database
   - artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
5. **time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
   - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday